Israel has blocked travel routes inside
the occupied West Bank Imran Khan has
this report from
rala okay I'm going back I'm going
back the occupied West Bank is now not
only occupied it's effectively blockaded
the Israeli Army has turned it into an
archipelago of separation
you can't leave your home to go visit
family or friends in a neighboring area
3.2 million Palestinians are simply
stuck I left 10 minutes ago I am sick
but they're not letting me in this is
worse than when we used mules to move
around in the old days now we can't even
get anywhere with cars Israeli forces
have also severely restricted the border
with Jordan the only crossing point for
Palestinians want to travel abroad
leaving thousands stranded so Kalia is
the head of settlement monitoring at the
applied Research Institute Jerusalem he
specializes in Israel system of
checkpoints and restrictions on
Palestinians the West Bank is surrounded
by hundreds of checkpoints at the border
with Egypt at the green line or within
the West Bank these new restrictions
have turned the West Bank into small
prisons and the occupier controls all
entries and exits this is the dco
checkpoint just north of rala it divides
Palestinian territory now the Israelis
make it very difficult for Palestinians
to normally cross this checkpoint but
now it's impossible they've just shut it
down completely in the Palestinian town
of Hua this road that runs through it
cannot be used by Palestinians sometimes
the Israelis make exceptions for medical
or family emergencies but even that
small concession has now gone if you're
Palestinian and you visited a
neighboring area on Saturday you're now
stuck there many here feel this
effective blockade may not be temporary
that it's simply a precursor to even
heavier Israeli restrictions that may
well become permanent Imran Khan Al
jazer Rah the occupied West
Bank Sir Jeffrey nice joins us from
Canterbury UK he is Emeritus Gres
professor of law uh sir I had a long
list of questions for you but we just
heard the US president he said a short
while ago from the White House quote we
uphold the rule of law and the laws of
war it matters there's a difference and
end quote presumably he was drawing a
distinction between the legality of uh
hamas's actions hamas's attack in Israel
and Israel's attack on the Gaza Strip
can you help our viewers navigate this
what is legal and not legal in what
you've been watching over the last four
days he may well have been drawing that
distinction and before I come to the
specific answer to your question I was
was inclined to make this
observation President Biden and Israel
could do a great deal for the rule of
law if they joined up to the
international criminal court and allowed
that Court to investigate the legality
both of the occupation to date bearing
in mind the illegality of the war in
Israel and submit peacefully to Legal
adjudication of what they're doing it's
an unhappy reality that Israel is more
or less immune from the jurisdiction of
the international criminal court that
America will save it if there's any
attempt to refer it there by the
security Council and that America itself
is not a member of that Court as to your
specific question then I think the
following has to be
accepted the strike by
Hamas is pretty obviously
unlawful they give reasons for it but I
don't think the reasons would Merit a
defense if challenged in
court the attack by Israel may or may
not be justified in part defense against
the Rockets
certainly
self-defense already a hard issue from
them to advance for several reasons not
just because uh um of the overall
circumstances but because uh you defend
yourself against a state and Gaza is not
a state it's also an occupied territory
and it's occupied by Israel so there got
out the initial problems about the
legality of what it's doing although
defending itself against the Rockets is
undoubtedly
legal the nature of its attack on Gaza
is much much more problematic for it and
the language of the politicians and
military leaders is something we must
watch with great
care Siege may just about in certain
circumstances be legal for example if
the siege is of a territory or a town or
an area that is comprised entirely of
opposing forces that is not the case
here and Siege brings it the
inevitability of the risk of starvation
it's almost
forecast by what is said by Israel and
intentional starvation is now recognized
without any doubt as an international
crime so the attack by the response
attack let's not use a portive term all
right Israel is doing is problematic in
at least those areas Sir Jeffrey nice
again I I would have loved for this
conversation to last a lot longer um we
weren't hadn't quite forecast the speech
and the length of the speech by the US
president but I thank you so much for
that invaluable analysis of what is
legal what's not legal and what's a
great area when it comes to the law of
War